Document macOS Packaging and Distribution (#12460)
slint-ui/slint: docs/astro/src/content/docs/guide/platforms/macos-packaging.mdx

---
title: macOS Packaging

> description: Package a desktop Slint app for direct macOS distribution or the Mac App Store.

Reviewer: Suggest to emphasise here that this is only for Rust by including Rust. It's not for C++, Python, or Node.js.

---

import { Aside } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

There are two main routes for distributing macOS apps: the [Mac App Store](https://www.apple.com/app-store/) and direct distribution.
Slint supports both routes by generating standard Xcode projects that work with Apple's build and distribution tools.

<Aside type="note">

> To distribute an app outside the Mac App Store, you need an Apple Developer Program membership.

Reviewer: I sense an opportunity for a link ;-)

Without one, you can only self-sign your app for local development and testing.
</Aside>

## XcodeGen

> [XcodeGen](https://github.com/yonaskolb/XcodeGen) creates an Xcode project that is compatible with Apple's build and distribution tools.

Reviewer: I think this needs to be rephrased. Instead of starting with a literal link to some "tool", but would be better to introduce the goal (build with apple's native toolchain for publishing) and then the solution (xcodegen).

Also, it's quite weird that the xcodegen section comes _before_ the prerequisites. shouldn't it be the other way around?

Reviewer 2: Maybe something like:

```suggestion
To build and distribute for the Apple ecosystem, we need an Xcode project. To avoid the need to maintain an Xcode project and our own project files in parallel, we can use [XcodeGen](https://github.com/yonaskolb/XcodeGen), which creates an Xcode project that's compatible with Apple's native build and distribution tools.
```

Don't check in or edit the generated project file.
Instead, edit the YAML project spec and regenerate the project whenever you change the app.

> This avoids checking a generated project into source control and keeping it up to date.

Reviewer: > Don't check in the generated project file.
> ...
> This avoid checking a generated project into source control.

This reads a bit weird, doesn't it? Of course, if I don't check in the file I can avoid checking it in ;-)

<Aside type="note">
If you open the project file in Xcode, you might see warnings that the project is out of date.
This is because the project is generated from a YAML spec and not edited directly in Xcode.
You can safely ignore these warnings.
</Aside>

> To complement this flow, we also provide a preconfigured Cargo build script that builds the app and places the binary in the expected location.

Reviewer: Instead of emphasising the delivery ("we provide") it would be better to emphasise that this is mandatory. And I suggest to phrase it user centric: "The generated Xcode project file requires an additional script. This script takes care of invoking cargo to compile the application." (don't take this verbatim)

        script: |
          ./build_macos_app_with_cargo.bash my-slint-app
        outputFiles:
          - $(TARGET_BUILD_DIR)/$(EXECUTABLE_PATH)
```

<Aside type="note">
The example sets the `Info.plist` values in the YAML spec.
You can change the app's bundle identifier, team, app category, entitlements, and resources without editing the generated project.
</Aside>

Then generate the Xcode project:

```sh
xcodegen generate --spec project.yml
```

The generated `.xcodeproj` is a normal Xcode project.
Add it to your `.gitignore` file so that you don't check it in.
You can open it in Xcode, build it with `xcodebuild`, or use it with Xcode Cloud.
To change the app target, `Info.plist` values, resources, entitlements, build phases, or signing settings, edit `project.yml` and regenerate the project.

The Cargo build script must copy the final executable to the path Xcode expects:

```sh
#!/usr/bin/env bash
set -euo pipefail

APP_BINARY="$1"
RUST_TARGET="aarch64-apple-darwin"

cargo build --release --target "$RUST_TARGET" --bin "$APP_BINARY"

mkdir -p "$(dirname "$TARGET_BUILD_DIR/$EXECUTABLE_PATH")"
cp "target/$RUST_TARGET/release/$APP_BINARY" "$TARGET_BUILD_DIR/$EXECUTABLE_PATH"

> chmod +x "$TARGET_BUILD_DIR/$EXECUTABLE_PATH"

Reviewer: Wouldn't it make more sense to copy while preserving permissions, instead of dropping them and fixing them up in the next line?

Reviewer 2: `ditto` would do this automatically afaik, but I also don't mind using `cp` + `chmod` in theory since it gives us precise control over the permissions. If you're going to use `chmod` then I'd use octal permissions instead of implicitly using the initial permissions then `+x`.

```

This example builds an Apple silicon app.

> If you need to support Intel Macs, add the `x86_64-apple-darwin` target and create a universal binary before copying it into the app bundle.

Reviewer: That seems incorrect, given that the shell script isn't prepared for that. I suggest to either leave this out or add support for it in the script. In that case, you can avoid the chmod/cp dance anyway and just rely on lipo to produce correct permissions.

9. Staple and validate the accepted notarization ticket on the DMG.
10. Verify the final DMG, its code signature, and the mounted app.

The core command-line tools are `xcodebuild`, `codesign`, `xcrun notarytool`, `xcrun stapler`, `hdiutil`, and `spctl`.
Apple's notarization guide is here:
[Notarizing macOS software before distribution](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/security/notarizing-macos-software-before-distribution).

Direct DMG distribution gives you control over hosting and updates, but it also means you own the signing certificates, CI keychains, notarization credentials, DMG layout, and verification steps.
Keep that automation small, explicit, and repeatable.

## Test a Beta With TestFlight

Use [TestFlight](https://developer.apple.com/testflight/) to distribute beta builds, manage testers, and collect feedback before release.
TestFlight isn't a production distribution channel.
It uses App Store Connect and Apple's store signing flow, not the Developer ID signing and notarization flow used for direct DMG downloads.

A typical TestFlight pipeline is:

1. Create the app record in App Store Connect.
2. Generate the Xcode project with `xcodegen generate`.

> 3. Configure the bundle identifier, team, entitlements, and resources in the YAML spec.

Reviewer: Aren't 2 and 3 the wrong way around?

A typical Mac App Store pipeline is:

1. Check in the XcodeGen YAML spec and related source assets.
2. Generate the Xcode project with `xcodegen generate`.
3. Configure the bundle identifier, team, app category, entitlements, and resources in the YAML spec.
4. Create the app record in App Store Connect.
5. Build, archive, sign, and upload the app with Xcode or Xcode Cloud.

You can also open the generated project in Xcode and submit from your local Mac.
This works well when you want to manage releases manually.
Xcode Cloud can automate the same archive and upload steps when you want a managed CI workflow.

[Xcode Cloud](https://developer.apple.com/xcode-cloud/) is built into Xcode and App Store Connect.
Apple Developer Program membership includes some free compute hours to build your app.

<Aside type="note">
Xcode Cloud performs the build, signing, and upload steps configured in your workflow.
You remain responsible for the bundle identifier, signing settings, entitlements, TestFlight groups, and App Store submission settings.
</Aside>

## Important Xcode Cloud Information

Xcode Cloud expects your app to have an Xcode project.

> You can meet this requirement without checking in the generated project.

Reviewer: To disambiguate, I suggest to use the "Xcode project file". Files are checked into git, while "projects" aren't a version control term :)

Open the project in Xcode and follow
[Apple's instructions](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/xcode/setting-up-your-project-to-use-xcode-cloud) for setting up Xcode Cloud.
The generated project lets Xcode Cloud complete the build and archive steps.
Use a `ci_scripts/ci_post_clone.sh` script to install the dependencies and generate the project in Xcode Cloud.
The Slint repository includes a [post-clone script](https://github.com/slint-ui/slint/blob/master/tools/viewer/ci_scripts/ci_post_clone.sh) you can use as a template.

## What to Check In

Check in:

- `project.yml`, or whatever you call the XcodeGen project spec.
- The Cargo build script called by the Xcode target.
- App icons, entitlements, launch assets, and bundled resources.
- Any scripts that package, sign, notarize, or verify direct-download artifacts.

Don't check in the generated `.xcodeproj` unless you have a project-specific reason to do so.
Regenerate it from the YAML spec instead.

XcodeGen documents the YAML project format here:
[Project Spec](https://yonaskolb.github.io/XcodeGen/Docs/ProjectSpec.html).

## Automate Direct Distribution in CI

Xcode Cloud is optional.

> You can build, sign, notarize, package, and verify a direct-download app on a local Mac or with a macOS CI service such as GitHub Actions or CircleCI.

Reviewer: Given that it's roughly 30 lines of code and that we _are_ going to mess up the file or move it around without adjusting these docs, wouldn't it make more sense to either have it verbatim here or generalise it like `scripts/build_for_ios_with_cargo.bash` ? The latter is raw-included, so there's only a single true source.
